Early on in the semester, we speculated that walking at night might be more dangerous than walking during the day. For our midterm report, we statistically tested that hypothesis (in place of applying machine learning) by comparing the number of crimes in our dataset that occurred before and after dark.

To do so, we used precise sunrise and sunset times for the cities and years for which we have crime data from the United States Naval Observatory’s Naval Oceanography Portal (http://aa.usno.navy.mil/data/docs/RS_OneYear.php), adjusted for Daylight Savings Time (http://aa.usno.navy.mil/faq/docs/daylight_time.php). First, we counted the number of crimes that occurred in the darkness (between sunset and midnight or between midnight and sunrise) vs. the daylight (between sunrise and sunset). We tracked separate counts for (a) crimes collapsed across all cities and all types of crimes, (b) crimes broken down by city and collapsed across all types of crime, and (c) crimes broken down by type of crime and collapsed across all cities. Then, we performed binomial tests of the null hypothesis that a crime is equally likely to occur in the darkness or in the daylight.

We found that the crimes are NOT equally likely to occur in the darkness or the daylight for any of our cities/types of crime, but are much more likely to occur during hours of darkness. This finding supported our initial intuition. Please see below for a summary of our statistical results.

It's interesting to note that we all saw a heat map of Chicago crime in VizOne that gave the impression that crime in Chicago is more likely during the day. To investigate, we compared the types of crime represented in the cleaned Chicago dataset from VizZOne with the types of crime represented in our dataset. Because our end goal is to build an app that helps pedestrians, we limited our project to crimes that happen on the street and that seem likely to affect the safety of a pedestrian. The VizOne Chicago data includes a much broader range of crimes, which we think explains the discrepancy between the VizOne heatmap and our statistical results for Chicago (and other cities).